# Sparkify: Data Modeling with Postgres

## 1. Introduction
To analyze the data which have been collected on songs and user activity on new music streaming app called "Sparkify", create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis. 
The main purpose of this project is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for the analysis. 

## 2. Dataset Description
JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as JSON metadata on the songs in the app.

#### 2.1 Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
~~~
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
~~~
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

~~~
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
~~~

#### 2.2 Log Dataset 
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.
~~~
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
~~~

## 3. Database and table Design
Using the song and log datasets, this project creates a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

#### 3.1 Fact Table
* `songplays` - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
#### 3.2 Dimension Tables
* `users` - users in the app
user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
* `songs` - songs in music database
song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
* `artists` - artists in music database
artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
* `time` - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


## 4. Project Template
* `test.ipynb` displays the first few rows of each table to check the database.
* `create_tables.py` drops and creates tables.
* `etl.ipynb` reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.
* `etl.py` reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into tables.
* `sql_queries.py` contains all sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.
* `README.md` provides discussion on this project.

